# My AI experiments: Serialization
##  Can we save a brain, like we do with neural networks? 

This article is part of a series on my [AI experiments](https://medium.com/@geertvandamme/61757b11c902), where I explore some issues I encountered while creating my own, clean, OO Neural network implementation.

- bit more controverial issue, haven't seen anything like this yet elsewhere

- explain serialization and deserialization (rasterizing images, framerate in video, sampling freq in audio)

## Neural network serialization
Classical NN (fully connected layers) are very easy to serialize. The structure is simple to describe so saving a whole model is just a matter of saving the weights and biases. So that's just 2 arrays of numbers. Since serialization and deserialization are so obvious, it allows us to save and load a model, but also copy or clone into multiple exact copies.
The view on neural networks as just being 2 arrays is widespread, but, as already mentioned, puts the focus on the network as a whole and not on the individual neurons. This view is in line with the use of the matrix algorithms (link).
Seeing a network as just 2 arrays implies a rigid (fully connected, layered) structure and  prevents us from exploring more complex architectures.

When we allow more experimental network setups (not fully connected, connections over layers, feedback loops...) serialization becomes more of a challenge.
The object-oriented approach we presented in (link) allows us to put more parameters on the neuron level, which are typically placed on the network as a whole.
Parameters like learning rate, direction and even activation function (params), could be allowed to vary from neuron to neuron.
This would make it much more difficult to save a model to a file or other structure. Those networks wouldn't fit into the formats or protocols we use today (like GGML or GGUF). We'd need to build our own format, but it wouldn't be that difficult. As long as we can put an ID on each neuron, we can save the network as a list of neurons and their respective connections. Assigning an ID to each neuron is quite easy in a digital environment.

### Brain serialization
In a digital environment, we can easily assign an ID to each neuron.
In a biological brain, however, neurons don't have an obvious unique ID. A neuron could be identified by its physical 3D spatial position in the brain, but that's not very obvious. An ID based on the interconnections to other neurons is even more problematic.
Saving even the structure of a biological brain hardly seems possible, retrieving all the relevant parameters from each neuron and every synaps is orders of magnitude harder. 
Even if we assume that our cognition, consciousness and identity are solely based on our physical brain and how the neurons are connected to each other (which I do believe), it still seems fundamentally impossible to serialize a brain.

Forms of brain serialization are a recurring topic in literature and in movies (SciFi). The star trek teleporter is a good example...  
If brain serialization were possible, this could lead to a whole list of difficult to imagine scenarios (Mindscan by Robert J. Sawyer...). What happens to our consciousness if we're able to make an exact brain clone? Is brain serialization de facto a form of immortality?
Or is the impossibility of cloning an essential aspect of our consciousness as an individual?

Artificial intelligence is inherently immortal because of the serialization-deserialization possibility. This fundamental immortality might prohibit the possibility of artificial consciousness.
Immutability (like also seen in 4) vs growth

This could lead to the paradoxical situation that we might once be able to create a form of artificial consciousness, but we would not be able to save that to a file or make a copy of it.


## Conclusion



* When we allow more complex architectures
    * unknown territory
    * brain similarity
    * GPU and matrix library issues
    * serialization
* cloning conflicts with learning / individualization of parallel clones
* cloning - highly parallel computing
* individuality
* Brain copy
* Sein zum tode 
*  
 